---
layout: post
title: Data in Public Policy
categories: project
date: '2014-09-01 00:00:00 -0500'
excerpt: Leading a student organization with a radically new mission.
tags: open policy
---

During my time at Harris, I helped lead the student organization [Data in Public Policy](http://ucdipp.org) (whose website looks suspiciously like my own) as they began reimagining the intersection of data analytics and policy issues. 

The organization was founded to provide an outlet for students who have, or would like to learn, data skills for careers in public service. Under my leadership, DIPP launched a number of collaborations with nonprofits and community organizations in which Harris students volunteered their data skills pro bono for a period of several months. Some of these collaborations include:

### Chicago Appleseed, Mapping Justice Project
_An interactive map to improve probation outcomes_

DIPP partnered with Chicago Appleseed Fund for Justice to produce a prototype of a Justice Resource Map: a web-based, searchable, user-friendly map of community resources that will enable connections between Chicago area community-based service providers and justice-involved individuals. Justice-involved individuals and their probation officers can enter an address to find service providers within a specified distance, filtering on type of service provided, and whether each provider honors various insurance providers for these types of services.  DIPP and Chicago Appleseed presented the prototype to the Access to Treatment (ACT) Court staff, who are piloting the map. 

### El Hogar del Niño, Gentrification in 60608
_How is Pilsen changing?_

Together with El Hogar del Niño, a nonprofit child-care agency, DIPP conducted a study of changing demographic trends in Pilsen in order to help the organization better anticipate the needs of its community. Findings include a relative decline in the percentage of Pilsen residents who are Hispanic, slow but steady rises in housing prices and incomes, and an increase in businesses--but a decrease in employment. DIPP presented the results to the board of El Hogar, to wide acclaim. 
### Harris Insider
_Reimagining Harris course evaluations_

DIPP decided to do something about the least useful page on the Harris website - and make it the most useful. Harris Insider, which launched in June 2015, synthesizes the course evaluations collected at the end of each quarter into a coherent look at the state of policy education at Harris. Students can see the feedback for individual courses, filter comments by commonly mentioned terms, find top courses along multiple metrics, and see how a course ranks compared to others at Harris. 

### Chicago Appleseed, Judicial Diversity and Voting Project ##
_Who picks our judges?_

Also with the Chicago Appleseed Fund for Justice, DIPP conducted a statistical analysis of data on judicial quality, diversity, and elections in Cook County since 1977. Some findings include whether minority candidates are more likely to be appointed or elected to the bench, the relationship between minority status and quality, and the fact that no judge has failed to win a retention vote since the 1990s. The findings were presented to the Appleseed staff, who are using them to encourage the Illinois Supreme Court to reform the way that judges are appointed, retained, and reviewed. 


### PPSA Academic Survey Results ##
_What do students think about the Harris curriculum?_

The Harris School Public Policy Student Association engaged DIPP members to conduct a statistical analysis of this year's academic survey and report how students feel about the current Harris curriculum. They shed light on what policy areas are in high demand, how students feel about the Core, and hundreds of suggestions for improving the academic environment at Harris. DIPP delivered presentations to PPSA, the Office of Student Affairs, the Dean, and the academic deans. 

### Office of Civic Engagement, Woodlawn Housing Project ##
_How is the housing market in Woodlawn changing?_

DIPP helped the University Office of Civic Engagement scope out an analysis of the state of Woodlawn housing stock, undertaken with the community organizations POAH and WECAN. The announcement that the Obama Presidential Library will possibly be located in Woodlawn, together with decades of shifting housing policy and gentrification pressure, added complexity to an already understudied market, and DIPP is helping to use available real estate and demographic data to shed some light on the community area just south of Harris. The project continued for a following year using groundwork laid by DIPP. 


